So, in this last part of customising our shell,
I want to show you aliases.
Aliases are effectively just shortcuts, shortcut commands
that you can customise as you please.
So, you see me type ls -ltr a lot,
it's muscle memory, but it's quite a lengthy command,
and it'd be great if I could just type ll.
Now, you can see from the Z Shell highlighting,
ll isn't a command, it's red,
so if I run it, nothing's going to happen.
So, what I want to do is alias ll to run ls -ltr,
and the way that we do this is we can just do...
I'll show you arbitrarily on the command line,
but I'll show you how to configure your shell
so that every time you open a new session,
that shortcut is there.
So, what we do is alias ll='ls -ltr', and that's it.
Okay, I hit enter, and that now has aliased the
ll command, and if I type it, you can see it's green now,
I run it and it runs my shortcut,
and it just makes it a little bit easier to type out.
I should note that if you're using Z Shell
and possibly Fish, there're a whole bunch of aliases
already set up for you,
and I've just got this on Google, so Google's cheatsheet,
sorry, Z Shell's cheatsheet, the oh-my-zsh, specifically,
has a whole bunch of aliases already set up,
and I've kind of undone a couple of them just so I can
show you how they work.
And I think the ll one is already in there under
something else.
Well, I know it is because I removed it,
the point being, if you have Z Shell, you will be able
to run ll and it will give you an output.
It won't match this, and you can overwrite it
and I'll show you that in a moment.
But, the thing I want to show you now is that
we have in this session,
when I open up another session, I type ll, it's red
because this session doesn't know about my alias.
So, what we have to do now is make sure that the alias
is configured every single time.
So, if you remember from previous video,
we have a Z Shell rc file, and we're going to edit
that file.
So, by putting the alias inside of here,
it means that it'll always include our alias
in every single shell we ever open.
So, I can just put the alias command directly in here,
ll = 'ls -ltr'
and if I hit save, now, when I open up a new session,
that shortcut should be there,
so let's go ahead and close our previous session,
open up a new one...
ll, no spaces, I think, let's try that.
And we have it in each session, brilliant.
And so the one thing I want to extend is
we can also put this into its own file
rather than adding it into our main config file
we can manage it separately,
that's fairly typical and it's the kind of thing
I use in my own dot files as well.
So, if we just open up a new file,
let's save this as .aliases, pretty common filename
for this, and I notice that sublime has renamed this
to .sh, which I don't want, but it'll have to
do for now, and we're gonna use the same syntax here,
source, users, rem, and .aliases.sh.
Now, if we open up a new terminal window,
ll still works, but it also means that we can manage
all our aliases inside of one window,
inside of one file, rather,
and that way I can kind of back it up
and put it in the git repo and make sure that when I
get a new machine, I have all my aliases in one go,
it means that if I switch to Fish, for instance,
I can just bring my aliases separately
and so, other ones I might want is ps, and I type in
ps auxww all the time, so let's have that.
There are aliases like this, so you can put
three dots equals cd...
Like that, and, like I said, Z Shell definitely
sets this one up for you, so you don't particularly
need it, but it's pretty handy if you have your
own kind of shell, you can also keep going with this,
which means that if you open up a new shell
and you go into documents, remy, public,
I can type three dots and it will go up to documents,
I think, yeah.
A really nice way of kind of shortcutting how we
see back and forth.
And there's kind of endless possibilities,
you find yourself typing something quite often,
just stick it in alias and the job is done.
One I use all the time is gs, and that's my git status,
and it's something I've just got, and I'll just type gs
and hit enter and it gives me the git status
for a project.
So, yeah, aliases, and the extension of that is
functions, which work similarly to aliases,
but allow you to kind of write shell scripting
to make it a bit more complicated,
so we'll look at those next.